.\" -*-nroff-*-
.TH glhackrc 5 "January 2003"
.SH NAME
.PP
glhackrc \- Configuration file for the glHack game
.SH DESCRIPTION
The glHack configuration file stores settings for both standard
NetHack options (like "hilite_pet") and glHack-specific options 
(like "keyrepeat").  Options that take a value will be shown here with
example values.
.PP
The config file is always
.B ~/.glhackrc
.SH FORMAT
The format is a superset of the standard NetHack configuration file
format (.nethackrc).  Lines beginning with a hash (`#') are comments
and are ignored.  Blank lines are also ignored.  The remaining lines
have the form:

.RS
KEYWORD=data...
.RE

(The keywords are uppercase as a matter of convention, but don't need
to be).  The two main keywords are
.B OPTIONS
and
.BR GL_OPTIONS .
The first is used for standard NetHack options, and the latter is new
and is used for glHack-specific options.
NetHack also defines some additional keywords: DUNGEON, EFFECTS,
MONSTERS, TRAPS, and BOULDER, which have little relevance to glHack
since they only control the text map view.
.PP
The data after the `=' sign depends on the keyword.
For both OPTIONS and GL_OPTIONS, the data consists of one or more
option names (possibly with values) separated with commas (`,').
A colon (`:') is used in between an option name and its value.
For example:

.RS
GL_OPTIONS=windowed,depth:32
.RE

contains two glHack options: "windowed" (without any value), and
"depth" (with the value "32").
.PP
Options can be booleans, integers, or strings.
Boolean options are enabled simply by including their name, and are
disabled by using an exclamation mark (`!') before their name (e.g.
"!windowed").  String values should not be quoted.
.SH GLHACK OPTIONS
These options must appear after the
.IR GL_OPTIONS " keyword:"
.TP
.B mode:1024x768
Use the specified video mode.  Normally glHack will
autodetect the mode, but using this option will
override that.  The default value (when all else
fails) is 800x600.
.TP
.B depth:32
Video depth (bits per pixel).  Possible values are
15, 16, 24 and 32, and 8 when using the software
renderer.  The default value is autodetected.
.TP
.B windowed
Open in a window.  Default is fullscreen.
.TP
.B gamma:+1
Gamma correction value.  Range is -5 to +5, where
positive values make the screen brighter, and
negative values make it darker.  Zero is the
default value (no adjustment).
.TP
.B jailsize:60
Sets the "jail" size, which is a percentage of
the size of the screen.  Usable range is 1 to 100.

The jail controls when the map window scrolls: when
set to 1, the player will always be centered on the screen.
and the map always scrolls when moving.  When set to
100, the map will only scroll if the player tries
to move off the edge of the screen.

This option is ignored when "jumpscroll" is enabled
(see below).
.TP
.B defzoom:16
Sets the default zoom factor, in pixels.  Use 0 to
make it the same as the tile size (i.e. 1:1 scale),
which is the default.  Use 8 to mean the text-mode
view.
.TP
.B keyrepeat:never  
Enables/disables keyboard auto-repeat.  Use "never"
to disable it everywhere, "always" to enable it
everywhere, and "partial" is a compromise which
enables auto-repeat for scrolling windows (etc) but
disables it for game commands (moving, etc).
.TP
.B altprev
Enables the alternate previous history (CTRL-P)
mode, which is more like the TTY version: the lines
are limited to the message window, and you don't
need to press CTRL-O, space or escape to dismiss
the window.
.TP
.B prevstep:3
Number of lines to step through the previous
message history.  For altprev
mode, using the same value as the message window
height (vary_msgcount) gives the best results.
That is the default for altprev mode,
for normal mode the default is 1.
.TP
.B reformat
Causes text windows that don't fit across the
screen to be reformatted.  The default is off.
.TP
.B shrinkwrap
Shrinks the fonts on text windows if they don't
fit across the screen.  It's mainly an alternative
to the `reformat' option.  Default is off.
.TP
.B flipping
Flips monster tiles horizontally so the direction
they face on-screen matches the direction they are
moving in.  NOTE: this only works in GL mode, and
it doesn't work with the Isometric tileset.
.TP
.B jumpscroll
Scrolls the map window in large jumps, rather than
single steps, which improves speed when using the
software renderer.  When enabled, the standard
NetHack option "scroll_margin" will be used to
decide when to scroll.
.TP
.B invisfx
Draws monsters which are invisible (but can be
seen by the player) using alpha blending (i.e.
translucently).  Default is off.
.SH NETHACK OPTIONS
Note that this manpage only documents a few standard NetHack options
(ones particularly relevant to glHack).
There are many more available, please consult the NetHack Guidebook
for the complete list.
.PP
These options must appear after the
.IR OPTIONS " keyword:"
.TP
.B windowtype:SDL
The windowtype option is very important for glHack.
This is the only way to select between the OpenGL renderer and the
pure software renderer.

The
.\" To select the OpenGL renderer, use the
.RB ` GL '
value (without quotes) selects the OpenGL renderer.
This is the default.

The
.\" and to select the software renderer, use the
.RB ` SDL '
value selects the software renderer.
.TP
.B tile_height:64
Choose the tileset to use.  Allowable values are 16, 32 and 64.
The 16x16 tiles are the same as the standard NetHack 3.4.0 ones.
The other tiles have been created (from many sources) specially for
glHack.  The value `64' selects the Isometric (pseudo-3D) tileset.
The default is 32.
.PP
.nf
.B font_size_map:20
.\".TP
.B font_size_message:8
.\".TP
.B font_size_status:14
.\".TP
.B font_size_menu:22
.\".TP
.fi
.B font_size_text:22
.TP
\ 
These options set the font size used in various windows on the screen.
Each number represent the font's height, and there are currently four
fonts available: 8, 14, 20 and 22.  All fonts use the IBM VGA
character set (cp437), and the `IBMgraphics' option can be enabled for
the text map view.

The default for font_size_map is 14, and for font_size_message is 20.
The default values for the rest will be copied from font_size_message
(allowing them to all share the same size).
.TP
.B vary_msgcount:4
Sets the number of lines in the message window.  Acceptable range is
between 2 and 8.  The default is 3.
.TP
.B scroll_margin:4
When the glHack option "jumpscroll" is enabled, the value of
scroll_margin is used to determine when to scroll.  It specifies
(roughly) the number of tiles to leave at the edge of the screen,
so when the player crosses that line, the map scrolls.
.TP
.B splash_screen
Can be used to enable/disable the initial splash screen.
It is enabled by default.
.SH EXAMPLES
Here is an example configuration file:
.PP
.nf
#
# glHack Config file
#
OPTIONS=windowtype:SDL
OPTIONS=tile_height:32,vary_msgcount:3
OPTIONS=font_size_message:20,font_size_map:14
OPTIONS=dogname:Woofer,catname:Morris
OPTIONS=horsename:Tally,fruit:mango
OPTIONS=color,hilite_pet,safe_pet
OPTIONS=verbose,lit_corridor,confirm
OPTIONS=pickup_burden:U,pickup_types:$?!/="
OPTIONS=!showexp,showscore,splash_screen,!time
OPTIONS=toptenwin,tombstone,menustyle:partial
OPTIONS=!prayconfirm,pushweapon,disclose:yi ya yv
#
GL_OPTIONS=!windowed,keyrepeat:always
GL_OPTIONS=altprev,prevstep:3
GL_OPTIONS=flipping,!jumpscroll
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.BR glhack (6)
.BR nethack-guidebook (6)
.PP
The glHack Homepage:
.UR http://glhack.sourceforge.net/
http://glhack.sourceforge.net/
.UE
.PP
The official NetHack page:
.UR http://www.nethack.org/
http://www.nethack.org/
.UE

